Title: BAnQ Joins the iRODS Consortium
Date: 2020-04-02 09:00
Author: Anne Johnson
Slug: banq-joins-the-irods-consortium
Status: published

<img src="{static}/images/banq_logo.png" width="150px" />

<br />


[Bibliothèque et Archives nationales du Québec 
(BAnQ)](https://www.banq.qc.ca/accueil/index.html?language_id=1) is the newest 
member to join the [iRODS Consortium](https://irods.org), the foundation that 
leads development and support of the integrated Rule-Oriented Data System 
(iRODS) data management software.

BAnQ is at once a national library and a national archives, the largest public 
library in the French-speaking world and a virtual library that is accessible 
worldwide. With its 12 facilities located throughout Québec (Canada), BAnQ 
receives over 2.3 million visits per year while its Web portal receives over 
7.6 million hits.

BAnQ, whose mandate is to serve the people of Québec and raise the profile of 
Québec's heritage materials throughout the world, provides online access to a 
great number of its services and collections.

iRODS is free open source software for data virtualization, data discovery, 
workflow automation, and secure collaboration used by research and business 
organizations around the globe. iRODS allows users to catalog all of their data 
and metadata into a unified namespace, and then automate their data management 
through an integrated rules engine.

"The data discovery, policy enforcement, and data virtualization features of 
iRODS are especially valuable for organizations like BAnQ, whose users want to 
find what they're looking for but do not need to know where data is stored or 
how it is organized behind the scenes," said Jason Coposky, Executive Director, 
iRODS Consortium. "BAnQ is in good company with other large-scale archival 
applications of iRODS, which have included the U.S. National Archives and 
Records Administration and the National Library of France. We look forward to 
working together to further extend iRODS' capability to support the 
preservation of historic records."

BAnQ technology specialists intend to use iRODS to support an ambitious records 
digitization program that aims to digitize the entire published and archival 
documentary heritage produced within or in relation to Québec since the 17th 
century. The collection, which will be made available to the public free of 
charge, includes a vast array of printed and handwritten material, photographs, 
sound recordings and other items. The collection is expected to reach 12 
petabytes of data by 2025 and will likely continue to grow after that.

"Data management is imperative in a digital preservation system," said André 
Parent, IT analyst in the Mission and Information Systems Department at BAnQ. 
"The system must support a high volume of data, preserve data and its 
integrity, and enable users to retrieve the data. Having iRODS in our 
preservation system allows us to manage replicas, retrieve data through 
metadata, increase security and check and repair data, along with other 
features that are important to support our staff and the functioning of our 
applications."

BAnQ's digital preservation system is based on the Open Archival Information 
System (OAIS) model. Parent noted that using open source software is considered 
a best practice for OAIS and is particularly important for projects like 
preservation systems that are expected to operate for many years.

The iRODS Consortium guides development and support of iRODS, along with 
providing production-ready iRODS distribution and iRODS professional 
integration services, training, and support. As a Consortium member, BAnQ will 
receive consulting and training from iRODS experts.

"iRODS is appealing to us because of its maturity and solid community," said 
Parent. "We want to become an active member in order to share knowledge and 
support others in the community."

The iRODS Consortium is administered by founding member 
[RENCI](https://renci.org), a research institute for applications of 
cyberinfrastructure located at the [University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill](https://unc.edu). Current members of the iRODS Consortium, in addition to 
BAnQ, include Agriculture Victoria, Bayer, Cloudian, University of Colorado, 
Boulder, DataDirect Networks, KU Leuven, Maastricht University, MSC, the U.S. 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, NetApp, OpenIO, Quantum, 
RENCI, SURF, the Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing, SUSE, Texas 
Advanced Computing Center (TACC), University College London, University of 
Groningen, Utrecht University, the Wellcome Sanger Institute, Western Digital, 
and three additional anonymous members.


