Title: Globus for iRODS Connector is released
Date: 2020-11-16 14:00
Author: Globus
Slug: globus-for-irods-connector-is-released
Status: published

<img src="{static}/images/globus_logo.png" width="150px" />

<br />

SC20, Atlanta, GA and Chicago, IL -- Globus, the leading research data 
management platform, today announced the general availability of Globus for 
iRODS, offering researchers an enhanced solution for policy managed data 
preservation. Using the Globus for iRODS connector researchers can access 
systems managed by iRODS via the same familiar interface they are accustomed to 
on other Globus-enabled storage. The connector enables secure, reliable file 
transfer to and from iRODS systems, and can be triggered to move data as part 
of iRODS workflows.

"We are delighted to offer the research community the combination of iRODS and 
Globus," said Jason Coposky, executive director of the iRODS Consortium. “Our 
users now have access to fast, reliable data transfer in their iRODS namespace, 
and can efficiently share data with research collaborators and external 
partners. Together, the two products provide complementary solutions for the 
broadest impact to the scientific community."

Globus for iRODS is the first connector to be developed under the Globus 
Community Connector Program. Today’s collaborative research efforts face an 
explosion of data residing in distributed systems, with a growing need to make 
those data accessible within and beyond the organization. As storage ecosystems 
expand to encompass high performance filesystems, cloud object stores, tape 
archives, and other proprietary storage, it becomes challenging for 
organizations to build out the necessary rich and connected infrastructure.

Over the past several years there has been a growing demand for new connectors, 
as well as a willingness among the community to develop them. In order to 
support these needs, Globus is introducing the Globus Community Connector 
Program. Now developers everywhere can contribute to the growing list of 
systems accessible 
via the Globus platform. Community developed connectors are built in 
collaboration with the Globus team and are jointly supported by their 
developers, ensuring a robust, cost-effective solution for researchers and 
research computing administrators alike.

"Globus for iRODS answers the long-running calls for iRODS support from the 
user community," said Rachana Ananthakrishnan, Globus executive director. "Our 
subscribers can further expand their range of connected systems, and offer 
their researchers powerful data management tools on iRODS-managed storage. As 
the storage landscape grows in complexity, the Globus Community Connector 
Program ensures the availability of tested, supported solutions for simplifying 
research data management on a wide variety of storage systems."

Globus will be hosting a talk on the new iRODS connector at SC20 on Nov. 17th 
at 2pm ET. Details can be found here: 
[https://www.globus.org/events/sc20](http://www.globus.org/events/sc20).

To request information on Globus for iRODS please visit: 
[globus.org/connectors/irods](https://globus.org/connectors/irods)

To learn more about the Globus Connections Program please visit: 
[globus.org/connectors/community-connector-program](http://globus.org/connectors
/community-connector-program)
