Title: iRODS Consortium welcomes NICS at University of Tennessee as newest member at SC15
Date: 2015-11-18 15:23
Author: Terrell Russell
Slug: irods-consortium-welcomes-nics-at-university-of-tennessee-as-newest-member-at-sc15
Status: published

<span class="s1">*Consortium membership doubles since last
Supercomputing Conference*</span>

<span class="s1">AUSTIN, Texas, Nov. 18, 2015 - The [<span
class="s2">National Institute of Computational
Sciences</span>](https://www.nics.tennessee.edu/) (NICS) at the
University of Tennessee today became the 13</span><span
class="s3">^th^</span><span class="s1"> member of the iRODS Consortium,
the membership-based foundation organized to sustain the integrated
Rule-Oriented Data System ([<span
class="s2">iRODS</span>](https://irods.org)) as free open source data
management software.</span>

<span class="s1">The newest consortium member was announced in the
[<span class="s2">RENCI</span>](http://www.renci.org/) booth (\#181) on
the SC15 show floor at the Austin Convention Center.</span>

[caption id="attachment\_3083" align="alignright" width="300"]![iRODS -
NICS]({static}/uploads/2015/11/iRODS-NICS-2-300x200.jpeg)
Dan Bedard, right, welcomes Gregory Peterson, director of the National
Institute of Computational Sciences, to the iRODS Consortium in the
RENCI booth at SC15[/caption]

<span class="s1">NICS, a National Science Foundation-funded
high-performance computing center that provides computational resources
for more than 1,000 users, is the seventh new iRODS Consortium member
this year. Other members are the Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cleversafe,
DataDirect Networks (DDN), EMC Corporation, IBM, NASA’s Atmospheric
Science Data Center, Novartis, Seagate, RENCI, University College
London, Complete Genomics, and the Data Intensive Cyber Environments
(DICE) group at UNC-Chapel Hill.</span>

<span class="s1">“The importance of managing data is central to
scientific research today,” said Gregory Peterson, director of NICS.
“Using iRODS and being a member of the consortium will help us better
serve our users, who have massive amounts of data to manage. That’s why
we exist—to help users do their science and make discoveries.”</span>

<span class="s1">Thousands of businesses, research centers, and
government agencies worldwide use iRODS for flexible, policy-based data
management that provides long-term preservation and federation. 
Organizations in the U.S., Europe, Asia, South America, and Africa use
iRODS to manage data used in genomics (e.g. the U.K’s £9 million eMedLab
collaboration),  climate research (e.g., NOAA’s National Climatic Data
Center and NASA’s Center for Climate Simulation); and seismology (e.g.,
the Southern California Earthquake Center). National and regional-scale
libraries, such as the French National Library and the Texas Digital
Libraries, also use iRODS to control their data.</span>

<span class="s1">“NICS serves a wide range of scientific users, and the
iRODS team looks forward to helping these world-class researchers
control their data,” said Dan Bedard, executive director of the iRODS
Consortium. “As consortium members, they will contribute greatly to the
continuing development of iRODS and we will learn much from the diverse
community they serve.”</span>

<span class="s1">The iRODS development team, based at the University of
North Carolina’s Renaissance Computing Institute (RENCI) will present
iRODS demonstrations at the RENCI SC15 booth (\#181) throughout the
remainder of the conference. Other demonstrations using iRODS
demonstrations will also be presented in the EMC booth (\#499) on
Wednesday at 2:30 p.m. and at the DDN booth (\#633) on Thursday at 12:30
p.m.</span>

<span class="s1">**About the iRODS Consortium**</span>

<span class="s1">The iRODS Consortium is a membership organization that
supports the development of the Integrated Rule-Oriented Data System
(iRODS), free open source software for data discovery, workflow
automation, secure collaboration, and data virtualization. The iRODS
Consortium provides a production-ready iRODS distribution and iRODS
training, professional integration services, and support. The world's
top researchers in life sciences, geosciences, and information
management use iRODS to control their data. Learn more at [<span
class="s2">irods.org</span>](http://irods.org/).</span>

<span class="s1">The iRODS Consortium is administered by founding member
RENCI, a research institute for applications of cyberinfrastructure at
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. For more information
about RENCI, please visit [<span
class="s2">www.renci.org</span>](http://www.renci.org/).</span>
