Title: SoftIron&reg; Joins the iRODS Consortium
Date: 2020-11-09 08:00
Author: SoftIron
Slug: softiron-joins-the-irods-consortium
Status: published

<img src="{static}/images/softiron_logo.png" width="150px" />

<br />

<strong>Certifies HyperDrive&reg; Compatibility with iRODS Architecture</strong>

London, UK -- SoftIron Ltd., the leader in task-specific data center solutions, 
today announced that it has joined the Integrated Rule-Oriented Data System 
(iRODS) Consortium, which supports the development of free open source software 
for data discovery, workflow automation, secure collaboration, and data 
virtualization. In joining the consortium, whose data management platform is 
used globally by research, commercial and governmental organizations, SoftIron 
has certified that its open source, Ceph-based HyperDrive&trade; Storage 
Appliances are compatible with the iRODS Architecture.

"With the open-source nature of Ceph and its 'Swiss Army Knife' capabilities 
that combine file, block, and object storage within the same infrastructure, we 
think that SoftIron's HyperDrive storage appliances are a perfect complement to 
organizations using iRODS, and who want to scale their storage in a supported, 
simplified, flexible way," said Phil Straw, CEO of SoftIron. "And, we're 
especially pleased to formalize our membership this week, to coincide with 
BioData World Congress." The event hosts some of the world's leading life 
science organizations - many of whom use iRODS as a key data management 
platform in pharmaceutical research - enabling collaboration in their pursuit 
to solve some of the world's great challenges. Phil continues; "These 
organizations are already using open source iRODS to advance their mission 
critical research, so we're excited to showcase what SoftIron and Ceph can do 
to provide them with performance, flexibility and scalability gains, as well as 
reducing their total cost of ownership."

"SoftIron and its strong orientation to open source is a great addition to the 
iRODS ecosystem," said Jason Coposky, Executive Director of the iRODS 
Consortium. "Ceph has been gaining traction with both vendors and end-user 
organizations engaged with iRODS. Welcoming SoftIron, which purpose-builds 
hardware to optimize every aspect of Ceph, as a member brings immense value to 
that ecosystem. We look forward to collaborating with SoftIron as we work 
together to bring added capability, and flexibility to the iRODS community."

In order to give iRODS users and others in life, bio and pharmaceutical 
sciences a perspective in using open source Ceph as part of their operational 
foundation, SoftIron's Andrew Moloney, VP of Strategy, will be presenting this 
week during the BioData World Congress. His presentation, titled, "Redefining 
Software-Defined Storage - All the Performance, Without the Complexity," will 
discuss some of the most important drivers of HPC storage growth, the 
operational challenges in storage infrastructure, and various infrastructural 
approaches for building software-defined storage architectures. Andrew's talk 
will be available at 12.30pm GMT, November 9th, 2020. For more information, or 
a copy of the talk, please email info@softiron.com.

SoftIron&reg; is the world-leader in task-specific appliances for scale-out 
data center solutions.
Their superior, purpose-built hardware is designed, developed and assembled in 
California, and they are the only manufacturer to offer auditable provenance. 
SoftIron's HyperDrive&reg; software-defined, enterprise storage portfolio runs 
at wire-speed and is custom-designed to optimize Ceph. HyperSwitch&trade; is 
their line of next-generation, top-of-rack switches built to maximize the 
performance and flexibility of SONiC. HyperCast&trade; is their high-density, 
concurrent 4K transcoding solution, for multi-screen, multi-format delivery. 
SoftIron unlocks greater business value for enterprises by delivering 
best-in-class products, free from software and hardware lock-in. For more 
information visit [www.SoftIron.com](https://softiron.com/)</a>.

The iRODS Consortium is administered by founding member 
[RENCI](https://renci.org), a research institute for applications of 
cyberinfrastructure located at the [University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill](https://unc.edu). Current members of the iRODS Consortium, in addition to 
SoftIron, include RENCI, Bayer, the U.S. National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, DataDirect Networks, Western Digital, the Wellcome Sanger 
Institute, Utrecht University, MSC, University College London, the Swedish 
National Infrastructure for Computing, University of Groningen, SURF, NetApp, 
Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC), Cloudian, Maastricht University, 
University of Colorado, Boulder, SUSE, Agriculture Victoria, OpenIO, KU Leuven, 
the Bibliothèque et Archives nationales du Québec, CINES, and four additional 
anonymous members.


